docs-src/modules/ROOT/pages/introduction.adoc, before:

= Introduction

The `pathom` library provides a set of functionality to build robust parsers to
process link:http://edn-query-language.org[EQL] requests.

If you are not familiar with link:http://edn-query-language.org[EQL], check it's docs for a general intro on its purpose.

In case you are not sure what this library is for, check the xref:rational.adoc[rational]
to understand the motivations for it.

== What does it looks like?

Let's start with a demo! Use the buttons to load pre-defined queries, also feel free to
edit and try around (start typing! it will auto-complete to help you explore the API!).

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="intro.demo" class="loader">
[:answer-to-everything]
</div>
++++

Source code for this demo:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/intro/demo.cljs[]
----

I hope you had a good time playing around, the intention of this library is to make
as easy as possible to implement API's like the one you saw you in the demo.

== How it works

The following diagram illustrates the main pieces that make a `pathom` parser:

image::parser-diagram.png[]

To break down in parts, let's imagine we are processing the following request:

[source,clojure]
----
[:answer-to-everything :answer-plus-one]
----

=== Parser

The parser receives the whole query to process, it will iterate over each attribute calling
the reader on each one of them.

=== Readers

A reader process a single entry from the query, the entry can be a
link:https://edn-query-language.org/eql/1.0.0/specification.html#_properties[property], a
link:https://edn-query-language.org/eql/1.0.0/specification.html#_joins[join] or an
link:https://edn-query-language.org/eql/1.0.0/specification.html#_idents[ident].
It is common to have a chain of readers (as in the photo and demo), for the chain case
it will try each reader in order, a reader can respond with a value or signal the engine
that it can't process the key, in this case the next reader will be attempted.

=== Resolvers

Resolvers are what you will write most while using Pathom, they are small blocks of
functions that do a step to process data.

=== Mutation

When you run EQL mutations, the mutate function will be called, the primary way to handle
then in pathom is defining connect mutations.

== In the package

The library includes:

* A composable xref:core/readers.adoc[reader abstraction].
* The concept of xref:core/entities.adoc[entity], which works as a base framework for reusable sharable readers.
* A xref:plugins.adoc[plugin system] with some built-in plugins:
** xref:core/errors.adoc[Error handler]: Handles errors at an attribute level.
** xref:core/request-cache.adoc[Request cache]: For caching the results of parsing repetition that can happen on a single request.
** xref:core/trace.adoc[Tracer]: a plugin to measure and debug each step of the parsing process.
* xref:connect.adoc[Connect]: a higher-level abstraction that can resolve attribute relationships automatically. For
example, automatic traversal of database joins or resolving data through network requests.
This enables exploratory capabilities and much simpler access when the need arises to do
extra work to resolve a single conceptual join.
* xref:graphql.adoc[GraphQL integration]: Use GraphQL endpoints directly from your query system (in development).

Most people find the most leverage in the xref:connect.adoc[Connect] features, which
allow you to quickly build dynamic query processing systems to satisfy client data requests
with ease.

== Aliases Used in Code Examples

Throughout the book, our code examples use aliases instead of explicit namespaces. The
aliases used assumes you have the following namespace requires:

```
(ns my-namespace
  (:require
    [com.wsscode.pathom.core :as p]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.connect :as pc]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.connect.graphql2 :as pcg]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.graphql :as pg]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.trace :as pt]
    ; clj only
    [com.wsscode.common.async-clj :refer [let-chan go-catch <? <?maybe]
    ; cljs only
    [com.wsscode.common.async-cljs :refer [let-chan <!p go-catch <? <?maybe]]))
```

So, any time you see the usage of a namespace in a keyword or function like `p/parser` or `::p/reader` you should remember
that these are the namespaces involved.

== Presentations

If you like to learn by seeing presentations, there are some that mention it:

1. link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yyVKf2U8YVg[Conj 2018 - Scaling Full Stack Applications]
2. link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r3zywlNflJI[Dutch Clojure Days 2018 - Clojure Graph API's]
3. link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UvJEBMOtayk[wroc_love.rb 2019 - Spice up your life with eql]

== Contributing

In every page of this documentation, you can find an icon at the top right, click on that
icon to edit the current page (it opens the Github link to edit the page source).

== How to Use This Library

We expect most of our user base is made up of Fulcro users, but this library is a stand-alone thing
that you can use to fulfill any system using EQL queries. The purpose of this library is to make it
much easier to build code that can process EQL on both the client and server-side.
We expect you to have one or more of the following needs:

* You want to fulfill a client UI query from some server-side data source(s).
* You want to build a client-side parser for directly filling local UI data queries from a local data source.
* You want to build a parser (client or server) that uses async APIs to fulfill different parts of a query. Perhaps
gluing together data sources from various micro-services.
* You want to use a GraphQL API from the client.
* You want to provide third-party users a GraphQL API (Future Work)

When building most parsers, you'll want to use xref:connect.adoc[Pathom Connect].

To process EQL queries against GraphQL you'll use the xref:graphql.adoc[GraphQL Integration].

Commit message:

Update parser and resolver sections

docs-src/modules/ROOT/pages/introduction.adoc, after:

= Introduction

The `pathom` library provides a set of functionality to build robust parsers to
process link:http://edn-query-language.org[EQL] requests.

If you are not familiar with link:http://edn-query-language.org[EQL], check it's docs for a general intro on its purpose.

In case you are not sure what this library is for, check the xref:rational.adoc[rational]
to understand the motivations for it.

== What does it looks like?

Let's start with a demo! Use the buttons to load pre-defined queries, also feel free to
edit and try around (start typing! it will auto-complete to help you explore the API!).

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="intro.demo" class="loader">
[:answer-to-everything]
</div>
++++

Source code for this demo:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/intro/demo.cljs[]
----

I hope you had a good time playing around, the intention of this library is to make
as easy as possible to implement API's like the one you saw you in the demo.

== How it works

The following diagram illustrates the main pieces that make a `pathom` parser:

image::parser-diagram.png[]

To break down in parts, let's imagine we are processing the following request:

[source,clojure]
----
[:answer-to-everything :answer-plus-one]
----

=== Parser

The parser receives the whole query to process. It iterates over each attribute calling
the reader on each one of them.

In our example, the parser receives the full query
`[:answer-to-everything :answer-plus-one]`.

=== Readers

A reader process a single entry from the query, the entry can be a 
link:https://edn-query-language.org/eql/1.0.0/specification.html#_properties[property], a
link:https://edn-query-language.org/eql/1.0.0/specification.html#_joins[join], or an
link:https://edn-query-language.org/eql/1.0.0/specification.html#_idents[ident].
It is common to have a chain of readers (as in the photo and demo), when its a chain,
it tries each reader in order, a reader can respond with a value or signal the engine
that it can’t process the key, in this case, it triggers the next reader.

In our example, the reader gets called one for `:answer-to-everything`, and then with
`:answer-plus-one`.

=== Resolvers

Pathom is capable of traversing a graph of dependencies to resolve data.
This feature is called xref:connect.adoc[Connect], and each resolver is an edge of this
graph traversal. You can find more information about then in
xref:connect/readers.adoc[connect reader] docs.

=== Mutation

When you run EQL mutations, the mutate function will be called, the primary way to handle
then in pathom is defining connect mutations.

== In the package

The library includes:

* A composable xref:core/readers.adoc[reader abstraction].
* The concept of xref:core/entities.adoc[entity], which works as a base framework for reusable sharable readers.
* A xref:plugins.adoc[plugin system] with some built-in plugins:
** xref:core/errors.adoc[Error handler]: Handles errors at an attribute level.
** xref:core/request-cache.adoc[Request cache]: For caching the results of parsing repetition that can happen on a single request.
** xref:core/trace.adoc[Tracer]: a plugin to measure and debug each step of the parsing process.
* xref:connect.adoc[Connect]: a higher-level abstraction that can resolve attribute relationships automatically. For
example, automatic traversal of database joins or resolving data through network requests.
This enables exploratory capabilities and much simpler access when the need arises to do
extra work to resolve a single conceptual join.
* xref:graphql.adoc[GraphQL integration]: Use GraphQL endpoints directly from your query system (in development).

Most people find the most leverage in the xref:connect.adoc[Connect] features, which
allow you to quickly build dynamic query processing systems to satisfy client data requests
with ease.

== Aliases Used in Code Examples

Throughout the book, our code examples use aliases instead of explicit namespaces. The
aliases used assumes you have the following namespace requires:

```
(ns my-namespace
  (:require
    [com.wsscode.pathom.core :as p]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.connect :as pc]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.connect.graphql2 :as pcg]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.graphql :as pg]
    [com.wsscode.pathom.trace :as pt]
    ; clj only
    [com.wsscode.common.async-clj :refer [let-chan go-catch <? <?maybe]
    ; cljs only
    [com.wsscode.common.async-cljs :refer [let-chan <!p go-catch <? <?maybe]]))
```

So, any time you see the usage of a namespace in a keyword or function like `p/parser` or `::p/reader` you should remember
that these are the namespaces involved.

== Presentations

If you like to learn by seeing presentations, there are some that mention it:

1. link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yyVKf2U8YVg[Conj 2018 - Scaling Full Stack Applications]
2. link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r3zywlNflJI[Dutch Clojure Days 2018 - Clojure Graph API's]
3. link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UvJEBMOtayk[wroc_love.rb 2019 - Spice up your life with eql]

== Contributing

In every page of this documentation, you can find an icon at the top right, click on that
icon to edit the current page (it opens the Github link to edit the page source).

== How to Use This Library

Most of our current user base is made up of Fulcro users, but this library is a stand-alone thing
that you can use to fulfill any system using EQL queries. The purpose of this library is to make it
much easier to build code that can process EQL on both the client and server-side.
We expect you to have one or more of the following needs:

* You want to fulfill a client UI query from some server-side data source(s).
* You want to build a client-side parser for directly filling local UI data queries from a local data source.
* You want to build a parser (client or server) that uses async APIs to fulfill different parts of a query. Perhaps
gluing together data sources from various micro-services.
* You want to use a GraphQL API from the client.
* You want to provide third-party users a GraphQL API (Future Work)

When building most parsers, you'll want to use xref:connect.adoc[Pathom Connect].

To process EQL queries against GraphQL you'll use the xref:graphql.adoc[GraphQL Integration].
