docs-src/modules/ROOT/pages/connect/connect-mutations.adoc, before:

= Connect mutations

Using mutations from connect will give you some extra leverage by adding the mutation information to the index, this will
enable auto-completion feature for the API explorer interfaces and also integrate the mutation result with the connect read engine.

== Mutations setup

The mutation setup looks very much like the one for resolvers, you define them using `pc/defmutation` and
include them in the registry, just like the resolvers.

[source,clojure]
----
(ns com.wsscode.pathom.book.connect.mutations
  (:require [com.wsscode.pathom.core :as p]
            [com.wsscode.pathom.connect :as pc]))

(pc/defmutation my-mutation [env params] ...)

(def parser
  (p/parallel-parser
    {::p/env     {::p/reader [p/map-reader
                              pc/parallel-reader
                              pc/open-ident-reader]}
     ::p/mutate  pc/mutate-async
     ::p/plugins [(pc/connect-plugin {::pc/register send-message})
                  p/error-handler-plugin
                  p/trace-plugin]}))
----

Now let's write a mutation with our factory.

== Creating mutations

The `defmutation` have the same interface that we used with `defresolver`.

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutations.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutations" class="loader">
[(send-message {:message/text "Hello Clojurist!"})]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

The `::pc/params` is currently a non-op, but in the future it can be used to validate the mutation input, it's format
is the same as output (considering the input can have a complex data shape). The `::pc/output` is valid and can be used
for auto-complete information on explorer tools.

== Mutation joins

After doing some operation, you might want to read information about the operation's result. With connect,
you can leverage the resolver engine to expand the information that comes from the mutation. To do that
you do a mutation join and use that to query the information. Here is an example where we create a
new user and retrieve some server information with the output.

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_join.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-join" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/name "Rick Sanches" :user/email "rick@morty.com"})
  [:user/id :user/name :user/created-at]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

Note that although we only return the `:user/id` from the mutation, the resolvers can walk the graph
and fetch the other requested attributes.

=== Mutation join globals

Some attributes need to be in the output even when they are not asked for. For example, if your parser is driving a
Fulcro app, the `:tempid` part of the mutation will be required for the app to remap the ids correctly. We could ask for
the user to add it on every remote query but instead we can also define some global attributes and they
will be read every time. As in this example:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_join_globals.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-join-globals" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/id "TMP_ID" :user/name "Rick Sanches" :user/email "rick@morty.com"})
  [:user/id :user/name :user/created-at]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

So in case of fulcro apps you can use the `:com.fulcrologic.fulcro.algorithms.tempid/tempid` as a global and have that pass through.

== Mutation output context

Mutation context allows the mutation caller to provide extra data to be used as context
information for further processing in the mutation response.

During UI development, sometimes you may want to load some data in response to the mutation but the mutation output
doesn't have enough context, although the UI does (because it has a much bigger view at the client data). For
those cases the UI can send some params to the mutation so those are available for traversing in the mutation
response.

To demonstrate this, check the following example:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_context.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-context" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/id "TMP_ID"
                :user/name "Rick Sanches"
                :user/email "rick@morty.com"
                :pathom/context {:number/value 123}})
  [:number/value :number/value++]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

One real use-case for this feature would be in a Fulcro app, when you send some mutation
but the result needs to update some component elsewhere (and the required data is known
by the client, but not by the original mutation result).

== Async mutations

This section is no longer necessary, the main recommendation now is to use the `parallel-parser` which is async, no
changes are needed to write async mutations, all you got to know is that you can return channels from your mutations
and they will be properly coordinated.

Here is an example of doing some mutation operations using async features.

Example:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_async.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-async" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/id "TMP_ID" :user/name "Rick Sanches" :user/email "rick@morty.com"})
  [:user/id :user/name :user/created-at]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

Using the same query/mutation interface, we replaced the underlying implementation from an atom to an `indexedDB` database.

You can do the same to target any type of API you can access.

Commit message:

Update recommendation on parallel parsers, not the main one anymore

docs-src/modules/ROOT/pages/connect/connect-mutations.adoc, after:

= Connect mutations

Using mutations from connect will give you some extra leverage by adding the mutation information to the index, this will
enable auto-completion feature for the API explorer interfaces and also integrate the mutation result with the connect read engine.

== Mutations setup

The mutation setup looks very much like the one for resolvers, you define them using `pc/defmutation` and
include them in the registry, just like the resolvers.

[source,clojure]
----
(ns com.wsscode.pathom.book.connect.mutations
  (:require [com.wsscode.pathom.core :as p]
            [com.wsscode.pathom.connect :as pc]))

(pc/defmutation my-mutation [env params] ...)

(def parser
  (p/parser
    {::p/env     {::p/reader [p/map-reader
                              pc/reader2
                              pc/open-ident-reader]}
     ::p/mutate  pc/mutate
     ::p/plugins [(pc/connect-plugin {::pc/register send-message})
                  p/error-handler-plugin
                  p/trace-plugin]}))
----

Now let's write a mutation with our factory.

== Creating mutations

The `defmutation` have the same interface that we used with `defresolver`.

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutations.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutations" class="loader">
[(send-message {:message/text "Hello Clojurist!"})]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

The `::pc/params` is currently a non-op, but in the future it can be used to validate the mutation input, it's format
is the same as output (considering the input can have a complex data shape). The `::pc/output` is valid and can be used
for auto-complete information on explorer tools.

== Mutation joins

After doing some operation, you might want to read information about the operation's result. With connect,
you can leverage the resolver engine to expand the information that comes from the mutation. To do that
you do a mutation join and use that to query the information. Here is an example where we create a
new user and retrieve some server information with the output.

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_join.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-join" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/name "Rick Sanches" :user/email "rick@morty.com"})
  [:user/id :user/name :user/created-at]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

Note that although we only return the `:user/id` from the mutation, the resolvers can walk the graph
and fetch the other requested attributes.

=== Mutation join globals

Some attributes need to be in the output even when they are not asked for. For example, if your parser is driving a
Fulcro app, the `:tempid` part of the mutation will be required for the app to remap the ids correctly. We could ask for
the user to add it on every remote query but instead we can also define some global attributes and they
will be read every time. As in this example:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_join_globals.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-join-globals" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/id "TMP_ID" :user/name "Rick Sanches" :user/email "rick@morty.com"})
  [:user/id :user/name :user/created-at]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

So in case of fulcro apps you can use the `:com.fulcrologic.fulcro.algorithms.tempid/tempid` as a global and have that pass through.

== Mutation output context

Mutation context allows the mutation caller to provide extra data to be used as context
information for further processing in the mutation response.

During UI development, sometimes you may want to load some data in response to the mutation but the mutation output
doesn't have enough context, although the UI does (because it has a much bigger view at the client data). For
those cases the UI can send some params to the mutation so those are available for traversing in the mutation
response.

To demonstrate this, check the following example:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_context.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-context" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/id "TMP_ID"
                :user/name "Rick Sanches"
                :user/email "rick@morty.com"
                :pathom/context {:number/value 123}})
  [:number/value :number/value++]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

One real use-case for this feature would be in a Fulcro app, when you send some mutation
but the result needs to update some component elsewhere (and the required data is known
by the client, but not by the original mutation result).

== Async mutations

If you use `async-parser` or `parallel-parser` you must use the `mutate-async` so mutations
work and support returning channels.

Here is an example of doing some mutation operations using async features.

Example:

[source,clojure]
----
include::example$com/wsscode/pathom/book/connect/mutation_async.cljs[]
----

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="connect.mutation-async" class="loader">
[{(user/create {:user/id "TMP_ID" :user/name "Rick Sanches" :user/email "rick@morty.com"})
  [:user/id :user/name :user/created-at]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

Using the same query/mutation interface, we replaced the underlying implementation from an atom to an `indexedDB` database.

You can do the same to target any type of API you can access.
