docs-src/modules/ROOT/pages/connect/readers.adoc, before:

= Connect readers

This section explains the different readers provided by `Connect`.

== pc/parallel-reader

Parallel reader from Connect is implemented to work with the `parallel-parser`. This reader
is capable of detecting attribute dependencies, execute multiple resolvers in parallel
and coordinate the return - including back tracking for the secondary paths. Here is how it works:

To begin, let's recall Connect's basic idea of expanding information from a context. To illustrate
this case let's have the following set of resolvers:

[source,clojure]
----
(pc/defresolver movie-details [env input]
  {::pc/input  #{:movie/id}
   ::pc/output [:movie/id :movie/title :movie/release-date]}
  ...)

(pc/defresolver movie-rating [env input]
  {::pc/input  #{:movie/id}
   ::pc/output [:movie/rating]}
  ...)

(pc/defresolver movie-title-prefixed [env input]
  {::pc/input  #{:movie/title}
   ::pc/output [:movie/title-prefixed]}
  ...)
----

Note that we have two resolvers that depend on a `:movie/id` and one that depends on `:movie/title`.

Now given the query: `[{[:movie/id 42] [:movie/title-prefixed]}]`

First we use the ident query to create the context with a `:movie/id`, for the attribute `:movie/title-prefixed`
the `parallel-reader` will be invoked. The first thing the reader has to do is compute a plan to
reach the attribute considering the data it has now. This is done by recursively iterating over
the `::pc/index-oir` until it reaches some available dependency or gives up if there is no possible path.

In most cases (specially for small APIs) there will only be a single path as it is the case in our example.
The result of `pc/compute-path` is this:

[source,clojure]
----
#{[[:movie/title `movie-details] [:movie/title-prefixed `movie-title-prefixed]]}
----

The format returned by `pc/compute-path` is a set of paths, each path is a vector of
tuples. The tuple contains the attribute reason (why that resolver is been called?) and the
symbol of the resolver that will be used to fetch that attribute. This makes the path from the
available data to the attribute requested, this is the plan.

For details on the path selection algorithm in cases of multiple options, check the
<<paths_selection, paths selection>> section.

Ok, now let's see how it behaves when you have multiple attributes to process. Here is
the new query, but this time let's try using the interactive parser, run the query and
check in the tracing how it goes (I added a 100ms delay to each resolver call so it's easier to see):

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="parallel-reader.demo" class="loader">
[{[:movie/id 42]
  [:movie/id
   :movie/title
   :movie/release-date
   :movie/rating
   :movie/title-prefixed]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

NOTE: Try changing the order of the attributes and see what happens. For example, if
you put `:movie/title-prefixed` at start you will see this attribute being responsible
for the title fetching and itself.

This is what's happening for each attribute:

`:movie/id`: This data is already in the entity context, this means it will be read from memory and will not even invoke
the parallel reader.

`:movie/title`: This attribute is not in entity, so it will create the plan to call `movie-details`.
From this plan, we can also compute all the attributes that we will incorporate in the call chain
(by combining the outs of all the resolvers in the path), we store this information as a waiting list.
The waiting list on this case is: `[:movie/id :movie/title :movie/releast-date]`. The processing of
attributes continues in parallel while the resolver is called.

`:movie/release-date`: This attribute is not on entity, but it is in the waiting list, so
the parser will ignore it for now and skip to process the next one.

`:movie/rating`: This attribute is neither in entity, nor in the waiting list, so we can
call the resolver for it immediately, and the plan output (`[:movie/rating]`) is appended to the
waiting list.

`:movie/title-prefixed`: Like the rating, this is not in entity or waiting, so we compute
the plan and execute, the plan is again:

```clojure
#{[[:movie/title `movie-details] [:movie/title-prefixed `movie-title-prefixed]]}
```

But `movie-details` is already running because of `:movie/title`, when the `parallel-reader`
calls a resolver, it actually caches it immediately as a promise channel in the request cache,
so when we hit the same resolver with the same input, it hits the cache, getting a hold
of the promise channel. And so, the process continues normally with only one actual call to
the resolver but two listeners on the promise channel (and any posterior cache hit would
get to this same promise channel). This is how the data fetch is coordinated across
the attributes, placeholder nodes are also supported and optimized to avoid repeated
calls to resolvers.

Another difference is during the processing of sequences, the parallel parser uses core.async
`pipeline` to process each sequence with a parallelism concurrency of 10.

== Path selection [[paths_selection]]

In case there are multiple possible paths, Pathom has to decide which path to take.
The current implementation chooses the path with less weight, that calculation is made
in this way:

. Every resolver starts with weight 1 (this is recorded per instance)
. Once a resolver is called, its execution time is recorded and updated in the map using the formula: +
`new-value = (old-value + last-time) * 0.5`
. If a resolver call throws an exception, double its weight
. Every time we mention some resolver in a path calculation, its weight is reduced by one.

If you like to make your own sorting of the plan, you can set the key `::pc/sort-plan` in your
environment and Pathom will call this function to sort the results. It takes the environment
and the plan (which is a set like demonstrated in the previous section).

== pc/reader2

This reader leverages some techniques which were developed during the
creation of the parallel reader, things like path choosing and
backtracking.

== pc/async-reader2

Like `pc/reader2` but knows how to handle async processing inside.

== pc/open-ident-reader

Like `ident-reader`, but not constrained to the indexed idents, this will create a context from any ident.

== pc/ident-reader [[connect-ident-reader]]

The `ident-reader` is used to resolve ident-based queries by establishing an initial context from the ident.
When an ident query reaches this reader it will check the index to see if the ident key is present on in the indexed
<<connect-index-idents,idents>>.

Since version `2.2.0-beta11` this reader also supports extra context provision using the param `:pathom/context`, here is how to send
extra data to it:

[source,clojure]
----
[{([:user/id 123] {:pathom/context {:other/data 123}})
  [:user/id :user/name :other/data]}]
----

== pc/index-reader

This reader exposes the index itself with the name `::pc/indexes`.

== pc/reader [DEPRECATED]

DEPRECATED: use `pc/reader2` instead

The main `Connect` reader. This will look up the attribute in the index and try to resolve it, recursively if necessary.

== pc/async-reader [DEPRECATED]

DEPRECATED: use `pc/async-reader2` instead

Like `pc/reader` but knows how to handle async processing inside.

Commit message:

Update recommendation on parallel parsers, not the main one anymore

docs-src/modules/ROOT/pages/connect/readers.adoc, after:

= Connect readers

This section explains the different readers provided by `Connect`.

== pc/parallel-reader

Parallel reader from Connect is implemented to work with the `parallel-parser`. This reader
is capable of detecting attribute dependencies, execute multiple resolvers in parallel
and coordinate the return - including back tracking for the secondary paths. Here is how it works:

[IMPORTANT]
====
The benefits of parallel parser come at a considerable overhead cost. After some experiments with
different users I got the conclusion that `parallel-parser` is not good for the most
users. To benefit from the parallel parser, you need to be in a position that:

1. You have large queries, meaning hundreds of attributes on the same query
2. You resolvers need to be "parallelized", meaning that should be ok to trigger
many of then at once, for example if most resolvers hit different foreign services.
====

To begin, let's recall Connect's basic idea of expanding information from a context. To illustrate
this case let's have the following set of resolvers:

[source,clojure]
----
(pc/defresolver movie-details [env input]
  {::pc/input  #{:movie/id}
   ::pc/output [:movie/id :movie/title :movie/release-date]}
  ...)

(pc/defresolver movie-rating [env input]
  {::pc/input  #{:movie/id}
   ::pc/output [:movie/rating]}
  ...)

(pc/defresolver movie-title-prefixed [env input]
  {::pc/input  #{:movie/title}
   ::pc/output [:movie/title-prefixed]}
  ...)
----

Note that we have two resolvers that depend on a `:movie/id` and one that depends on `:movie/title`.

Now given the query: `[{[:movie/id 42] [:movie/title-prefixed]}]`

First we use the ident query to create the context with a `:movie/id`, for the attribute `:movie/title-prefixed`
the `parallel-reader` will be invoked. The first thing the reader has to do is compute a plan to
reach the attribute considering the data it has now. This is done by recursively iterating over
the `::pc/index-oir` until it reaches some available dependency or gives up if there is no possible path.

In most cases (specially for small APIs) there will only be a single path as it is the case in our example.
The result of `pc/compute-path` is this:

[source,clojure]
----
#{[[:movie/title `movie-details] [:movie/title-prefixed `movie-title-prefixed]]}
----

The format returned by `pc/compute-path` is a set of paths, each path is a vector of
tuples. The tuple contains the attribute reason (why that resolver is been called?) and the
symbol of the resolver that will be used to fetch that attribute. This makes the path from the
available data to the attribute requested, this is the plan.

For details on the path selection algorithm in cases of multiple options, check the
<<paths_selection, paths selection>> section.

Ok, now let's see how it behaves when you have multiple attributes to process. Here is
the new query, but this time let's try using the interactive parser, run the query and
check in the tracing how it goes (I added a 100ms delay to each resolver call so it's easier to see):

++++
<div x-app="interactive-parser" data-parser="parallel-reader.demo" class="loader">
[{[:movie/id 42]
  [:movie/id
   :movie/title
   :movie/release-date
   :movie/rating
   :movie/title-prefixed]}]
</div>
<div class="space"></div>
++++

NOTE: Try changing the order of the attributes and see what happens. For example, if
you put `:movie/title-prefixed` at start you will see this attribute being responsible
for the title fetching and itself.

This is what's happening for each attribute:

`:movie/id`: This data is already in the entity context, this means it will be read from memory and will not even invoke
the parallel reader.

`:movie/title`: This attribute is not in entity, so it will create the plan to call `movie-details`.
From this plan, we can also compute all the attributes that we will incorporate in the call chain
(by combining the outs of all the resolvers in the path), we store this information as a waiting list.
The waiting list on this case is: `[:movie/id :movie/title :movie/releast-date]`. The processing of
attributes continues in parallel while the resolver is called.

`:movie/release-date`: This attribute is not on entity, but it is in the waiting list, so
the parser will ignore it for now and skip to process the next one.

`:movie/rating`: This attribute is neither in entity, nor in the waiting list, so we can
call the resolver for it immediately, and the plan output (`[:movie/rating]`) is appended to the
waiting list.

`:movie/title-prefixed`: Like the rating, this is not in entity or waiting, so we compute
the plan and execute, the plan is again:

```clojure
#{[[:movie/title `movie-details] [:movie/title-prefixed `movie-title-prefixed]]}
```

But `movie-details` is already running because of `:movie/title`, when the `parallel-reader`
calls a resolver, it actually caches it immediately as a promise channel in the request cache,
so when we hit the same resolver with the same input, it hits the cache, getting a hold
of the promise channel. And so, the process continues normally with only one actual call to
the resolver but two listeners on the promise channel (and any posterior cache hit would
get to this same promise channel). This is how the data fetch is coordinated across
the attributes, placeholder nodes are also supported and optimized to avoid repeated
calls to resolvers.

Another difference is during the processing of sequences, the parallel parser uses core.async
`pipeline` to process each sequence with a parallelism concurrency of 10.

== Path selection [[paths_selection]]

In case there are multiple possible paths, Pathom has to decide which path to take.
The current implementation chooses the path with less weight, that calculation is made
in this way:

. Every resolver starts with weight 1 (this is recorded per instance)
. Once a resolver is called, its execution time is recorded and updated in the map using the formula: +
`new-value = (old-value + last-time) * 0.5`
. If a resolver call throws an exception, double its weight
. Every time we mention some resolver in a path calculation, its weight is reduced by one.

If you like to make your own sorting of the plan, you can set the key `::pc/sort-plan` in your
environment and Pathom will call this function to sort the results. It takes the environment
and the plan (which is a set like demonstrated in the previous section).

== pc/reader2

This reader leverages some techniques which were developed during the
creation of the parallel reader, things like path choosing and
backtracking.

== pc/async-reader2

Like `pc/reader2` but knows how to handle async processing inside.

== pc/open-ident-reader

Like `ident-reader`, but not constrained to the indexed idents, this will create a context from any ident.

== pc/ident-reader [[connect-ident-reader]]

The `ident-reader` is used to resolve ident-based queries by establishing an initial context from the ident.
When an ident query reaches this reader it will check the index to see if the ident key is present on in the indexed
<<connect-index-idents,idents>>.

Since version `2.2.0-beta11` this reader also supports extra context provision using the param `:pathom/context`, here is how to send
extra data to it:

[source,clojure]
----
[{([:user/id 123] {:pathom/context {:other/data 123}})
  [:user/id :user/name :other/data]}]
----

== pc/index-reader

This reader exposes the index itself with the name `::pc/indexes`.

== pc/reader [DEPRECATED]

DEPRECATED: use `pc/reader2` instead

The main `Connect` reader. This will look up the attribute in the index and try to resolve it, recursively if necessary.

== pc/async-reader [DEPRECATED]

DEPRECATED: use `pc/async-reader2` instead

Like `pc/reader` but knows how to handle async processing inside.
